---
title: "Golang Basics: Feeling Go"
date: 2021-09-20T09:50:05+05:30
draft: true
tags: ["Golang Basics", "Golang"]
summary: "First blog in the `Golang Basics` series, covering concepts of Variables, Values and Types in Golang"
---

Hello fellow gophers, in this blog we'll be going through an introduction of what Golang is, along with simple but most important things that make up programs in Go. We will be covering everything `Variables` and `Types`.

### Why even should you?
Golang is considered to be one of he best statically typed, compiled programming language designed and heavily used at Google. It is built to take full advantage of parallel computing in modern computers, provides efficient compilation and execution, and many other awesome features.

Ain't that enough? Check out these awesome projects built with Go

- [Docker](https://github.com/docker/engine)
- [Kubernetes](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes)
- [Fedora CoreOS](https://github.com/orgs/coreos/repositories?language=go)
- [Hugo](https://github.com/gohugoio/hugo)
- Terraform, and many others


### Intro
We won't be installing Golang on our local systems, instead we'll use this awesome web service [Golang Playground](https://play.golang.org/) that runs on `golang.org`'s servers. This way, we won't have to deal with installation process and issues for learning Golang basics. I would love if you code along with this blog, there is also a playground link at the bottom for the code used in this blog.


### Variables: var war;
Variables are the base of any program you write, they help us store useful values and let us work efficiently. There are many ways to declare variables in Golang, we'll start with variable declaration using the `var` keyword.

Code snippet:
```go
// Variable declaration with "var" keyword
var name string
var age int
var height float64
var name2 string = "Person"
fmt.Printf("Variables: name=%v, age=%v, height=%v, name2=%v \n", name, age, height, name2) // don't worry we'll cover use of fmt later in the series
```
Output:
```
Variables: name=, age=0, height=0, name2=Person 
```

Note: the semicolon `;` symbol at the end of the statement is optional, as seen in the last line.

The `var` keyword allows us to create variables that have values which can be changed later on (value reassignment), but the variable cannot be declared again. When any variable is declared without a value, it takes up the default value of the type that was assigned to it. For our example name took the value of "" (an empty string), age took the value of 0, height took the value of 0.

Another keyword used for variables declaration is the `const` keyword. As the name suggests, once a variable is assigned some value using `const` it can not be reassigned to a different value.

Code snippet:
```go
const year int = 2021;
year = 2022; // Will cause an error
```
Output:
```
./prog.go:26:7: cannot assign to year (declared const)
```

Pretty simple aye! Last but not the least, the `Short Variable Declaration` using the `:=` symbol. Variables declared using `:=` behave mostly the same as variables declared with `var` keyword, with only one major difference that in some cases they can be re-declared.

Code snippet:
```go
// Syntax: variableName := variableValue
// Variable declaration using the Short hand
war := true
country := "India"
i := 3
fmt.Printf("Short variable declaration: war=%v, country=%v, i=%v \n", war, country, i)
```
Output:
```
Short variable declaration: war=true, country=India, i=3 
```

[language specification ref](https://golang.org/ref/spec#Variable_declarations)


### Types
We use types in Go to declare our variables with `var` and `const` and we saw this in the pervious section. So what are these types anyway? Everything in Go is a `type`, from a functions to strings, from int to float. Here are a few types from language specs:

1. Boolean types
2. Numeric types
3. String types
4. Array types
5. Slice types
6. Struct types, etc

For memory efficient programming we have smaller bit sized types in `Numeric types` like int8 which has a range from -128 to 127. Some different type declarations:

Code snippet:
```go
// Types
// Boolean
var isGo bool = true
fmt.Printf("Boolean: isGo={val:%v, type:%T}\n", isGo, isGo)
// Numeric
var j int8 = 32
var k uint = 12 // unsigned int, means only positive values allowed, range 0 to 255
var temperature float32 = 43.8
fmt.Printf("Numeric: j={val:%v, type:%T}\nk={val:%v, type:%T}\ntemperature={val:%v, type:%T}\n", j, j, k, k, temperature, temperature)
// Strings
var text string = "Hello gophers" // strings are immutable, once created cannot be changed
fmt.Printf("String: text={val:%v, type:%T}\n", text, text)
```
Output:
```
Boolean: isGo={val:true, type:bool}
Numeric: j={val:32, type:int8}
k={val:12, type:uint}
temperature={val:43.8, type:float32}
String: text={val:Hello gophers, type:string}
```

We'll have a look on other types as we move along the blog series. We can also declare our own types using the `type` variable

Code snippet:
```go
// custom type
type msg string
var m msg = "Yo Yo Golang"
fmt.Printf("String: msg={val:%v, type:%T}\n", m, m)
```
Output:
```
String: msg={val:Yo Yo Golang, type:main.msg}
```

Below is the link to the section on types in the official documentation, it will provide great knowledge on types in Go as it covers everything in great detail.

[language specification ref](https://golang.org/ref/spec#Types)


### Only Conversion, no Casting
Unlike other programming languages such as C and Java, Go does not provide type casting and only has explicit type conversions. For example if we want to convert an int value to float we can do so using the `float64()`

Code snippet:
```go
// Type convertion
var t int64 = 12345
fmt.Printf("int: t={val:%v, type:%T}\n", t, t)
var tf float64 = float64(t)
fmt.Printf("Casted float: msg={val:%v, type:%T}\n", tf, tf)
```
Output:
```
int: t={val:12345, type:int64}
Casted float: msg={val:12345, type:float64}
```

This is how we can change the type in our program.

[language specification ref](https://golang.org/ref/spec#Conversions)


### Concluding
Go is beautiful, efficient, and powerful. It allows us to declare variables using `var` and `const` keywords. It provides us with various types keeping in mind memory efficiency. There is no type casting and only type conversion in GoLang.

I hope you liked this short blog, for a detailed understanding and hands on experience check out the `Resource` section below and read the language specification references added after each section. This marks the end of the first blog of the series [GoLang Basics](/blogs/golangbasics/1/).

### Resource
The sample code is available through the Golang Playground and Github Gist links below

- [Tweet for discussion](https://twitter.com/SarthakPranesh/status/1440265795548762115)
- [Golang Playground Code](https://play.golang.org/p/ytproS5E8iW)
- [Github Gist Code](https://gist.github.com/sarthakpranesh/4b8078c50b034364318cbfdcbe50467d)


